Documentation/arm64/tagged-address-abi.rst, before:

==========================
AArch64 TAGGED ADDRESS ABI
==========================

Authors: Vincenzo Frascino <vincenzo.frascino@arm.com>
         Catalin Marinas <catalin.marinas@arm.com>

Date: 21 August 2019

This document describes the usage and semantics of the Tagged Address
ABI on AArch64 Linux.

1. Introduction
---------------

On AArch64 the ``TCR_EL1.TBI0`` bit is set by default, allowing
userspace (EL0) to perform memory accesses through 64-bit pointers with
a non-zero top byte. This document describes the relaxation of the
syscall ABI that allows userspace to pass certain tagged pointers to
kernel syscalls.

2. AArch64 Tagged Address ABI
-----------------------------

From the kernel syscall interface perspective and for the purposes of
this document, a "valid tagged pointer" is a pointer with a potentially
non-zero top-byte that references an address in the user process address
space obtained in one of the following ways:

- ``mmap()`` syscall where either:

  - flags have the ``MAP_ANONYMOUS`` bit set or
  - the file descriptor refers to a regular file (including those
    returned by ``memfd_create()``) or ``/dev/zero``

- ``brk()`` syscall (i.e. the heap area between the initial location of
  the program break at process creation and its current location).

- any memory mapped by the kernel in the address space of the process
  during creation and with the same restrictions as for ``mmap()`` above
  (e.g. data, bss, stack).

The AArch64 Tagged Address ABI has two stages of relaxation depending
how the user addresses are used by the kernel:

1. User addresses not accessed by the kernel but used for address space
   management (e.g. ``mmap()``, ``mprotect()``, ``madvise()``). The use
   of valid tagged pointers in this context is always allowed.

2. User addresses accessed by the kernel (e.g. ``write()``). This ABI
   relaxation is disabled by default and the application thread needs to
   explicitly enable it via ``prctl()`` as follows:

   - ``PR_SET_TAGGED_ADDR_CTRL``: enable or disable the AArch64 Tagged
     Address ABI for the calling thread.

     The ``(unsigned int) arg2`` argument is a bit mask describing the
     control mode used:

     - ``PR_TAGGED_ADDR_ENABLE``: enable AArch64 Tagged Address ABI.
       Default status is disabled.

     Arguments ``arg3``, ``arg4``, and ``arg5`` must be 0.

   - ``PR_GET_TAGGED_ADDR_CTRL``: get the status of the AArch64 Tagged
     Address ABI for the calling thread.

     Arguments ``arg2``, ``arg3``, ``arg4``, and ``arg5`` must be 0.

   The ABI properties described above are thread-scoped, inherited on
   clone() and fork() and cleared on exec().

   Calling ``prctl(PR_SET_TAGGED_ADDR_CTRL, PR_TAGGED_ADDR_ENABLE, 0, 0, 0)``
   returns ``-EINVAL`` if the AArch64 Tagged Address ABI is globally
   disabled by ``sysctl abi.tagged_addr_disabled=1``. The default
   ``sysctl abi.tagged_addr_disabled`` configuration is 0.

When the AArch64 Tagged Address ABI is enabled for a thread, the
following behaviours are guaranteed:

- All syscalls except the cases mentioned in section 3 can accept any
  valid tagged pointer.

- The syscall behaviour is undefined for invalid tagged pointers: it may
  result in an error code being returned, a (fatal) signal being raised,
  or other modes of failure.

- The syscall behaviour for a valid tagged pointer is the same as for
  the corresponding untagged pointer.


A definition of the meaning of tagged pointers on AArch64 can be found
in Documentation/arm64/tagged-pointers.rst.

3. AArch64 Tagged Address ABI Exceptions
-----------------------------------------

The following system call parameters must be untagged regardless of the
ABI relaxation:

- ``prctl()`` other than pointers to user data either passed directly or
  indirectly as arguments to be accessed by the kernel.

- ``ioctl()`` other than pointers to user data either passed directly or
  indirectly as arguments to be accessed by the kernel.

- ``shmat()`` and ``shmdt()``.

Any attempt to use non-zero tagged pointers may result in an error code
being returned, a (fatal) signal being raised, or other modes of
failure.

4. Example of correct usage
---------------------------
.. code-block:: c

   #include <stdlib.h>
   #include <string.h>
   #include <unistd.h>
   #include <sys/mman.h>
   #include <sys/prctl.h>
   
   #define PR_SET_TAGGED_ADDR_CTRL	55
   #define PR_TAGGED_ADDR_ENABLE	(1UL << 0)
   
   #define TAG_SHIFT		56
   
   int main(void)
   {
   	int tbi_enabled = 0;
   	unsigned long tag = 0;
   	char *ptr;
   
   	/* check/enable the tagged address ABI */
   	if (!prctl(PR_SET_TAGGED_ADDR_CTRL, PR_TAGGED_ADDR_ENABLE, 0, 0, 0))
   		tbi_enabled = 1;
   
   	/* memory allocation */
   	ptr = mmap(NULL, sysconf(_SC_PAGE_SIZE), PROT_READ | PROT_WRITE,
   		   MAP_PRIVATE | MAP_ANONYMOUS, -1, 0);
   	if (ptr == MAP_FAILED)
   		return 1;
   
   	/* set a non-zero tag if the ABI is available */
   	if (tbi_enabled)
   		tag = rand() & 0xff;
   	ptr = (char *)((unsigned long)ptr | (tag << TAG_SHIFT));
   
   	/* memory access to a tagged address */
   	strcpy(ptr, "tagged pointer\n");
   
   	/* syscall with a tagged pointer */
   	write(1, ptr, strlen(ptr));
   
   	return 0;
   }

Commit message:

UPSTREAM: mm: Avoid creating virtual address aliases in brk()/mmap()/mremap()
(Upstream commit dcde237319e626d1ec3c9d8b7613032f0fd4663a.)

Currently the arm64 kernel ignores the top address byte passed to brk(),
mmap() and mremap(). When the user is not aware of the 56-bit address
limit or relies on the kernel to return an error, untagging such
pointers has the potential to create address aliases in user-space.
Passing a tagged address to munmap(), madvise() is permitted since the
tagged pointer is expected to be inside an existing mapping.

The current behaviour breaks the existing glibc malloc() implementation
which relies on brk() with an address beyond 56-bit to be rejected by
the kernel.

Remove untagging in the above functions by partially reverting commit
ce18d171cb73 ("mm: untag user pointers in mmap/munmap/mremap/brk"). In
addition, update the arm64 tagged-address-abi.rst document accordingly.

Link: https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1797052
Fixes: ce18d171cb73 ("mm: untag user pointers in mmap/munmap/mremap/brk")
Cc: <stable@vger.kernel.org> # 5.4.x-
Cc: Florian Weimer <fweimer@redhat.com>
Reviewed-by: Andrew Morton <akpm@linux-foundation.org>
Reported-by: Victor Stinner <vstinner@redhat.com>
Acked-by: Will Deacon <will@kernel.org>
Acked-by: Andrey Konovalov <andreyknvl@google.com>
Signed-off-by: Catalin Marinas <catalin.marinas@arm.com>
Signed-off-by: Will Deacon <will@kernel.org>
Bug: 135692346
Change-Id: Iadeceb2d5d5fb576ab1bb5ae1a67f4971bbbf88e
Signed-off-by: Andrey Konovalov <andreyknvl@google.com>
(cherry picked from commit 3419228ff5f9a17b7c7342221e92fd8d671d99d2)

Documentation/arm64/tagged-address-abi.rst, after:

==========================
AArch64 TAGGED ADDRESS ABI
==========================

Authors: Vincenzo Frascino <vincenzo.frascino@arm.com>
         Catalin Marinas <catalin.marinas@arm.com>

Date: 21 August 2019

This document describes the usage and semantics of the Tagged Address
ABI on AArch64 Linux.

1. Introduction
---------------

On AArch64 the ``TCR_EL1.TBI0`` bit is set by default, allowing
userspace (EL0) to perform memory accesses through 64-bit pointers with
a non-zero top byte. This document describes the relaxation of the
syscall ABI that allows userspace to pass certain tagged pointers to
kernel syscalls.

2. AArch64 Tagged Address ABI
-----------------------------

From the kernel syscall interface perspective and for the purposes of
this document, a "valid tagged pointer" is a pointer with a potentially
non-zero top-byte that references an address in the user process address
space obtained in one of the following ways:

- ``mmap()`` syscall where either:

  - flags have the ``MAP_ANONYMOUS`` bit set or
  - the file descriptor refers to a regular file (including those
    returned by ``memfd_create()``) or ``/dev/zero``

- ``brk()`` syscall (i.e. the heap area between the initial location of
  the program break at process creation and its current location).

- any memory mapped by the kernel in the address space of the process
  during creation and with the same restrictions as for ``mmap()`` above
  (e.g. data, bss, stack).

The AArch64 Tagged Address ABI has two stages of relaxation depending
how the user addresses are used by the kernel:

1. User addresses not accessed by the kernel but used for address space
   management (e.g. ``mprotect()``, ``madvise()``). The use of valid
   tagged pointers in this context is allowed with the exception of
   ``brk()``, ``mmap()`` and the ``new_address`` argument to
   ``mremap()`` as these have the potential to alias with existing
   user addresses.

   NOTE: This behaviour changed in v5.6 and so some earlier kernels may
   incorrectly accept valid tagged pointers for the ``brk()``,
   ``mmap()`` and ``mremap()`` system calls.

2. User addresses accessed by the kernel (e.g. ``write()``). This ABI
   relaxation is disabled by default and the application thread needs to
   explicitly enable it via ``prctl()`` as follows:

   - ``PR_SET_TAGGED_ADDR_CTRL``: enable or disable the AArch64 Tagged
     Address ABI for the calling thread.

     The ``(unsigned int) arg2`` argument is a bit mask describing the
     control mode used:

     - ``PR_TAGGED_ADDR_ENABLE``: enable AArch64 Tagged Address ABI.
       Default status is disabled.

     Arguments ``arg3``, ``arg4``, and ``arg5`` must be 0.

   - ``PR_GET_TAGGED_ADDR_CTRL``: get the status of the AArch64 Tagged
     Address ABI for the calling thread.

     Arguments ``arg2``, ``arg3``, ``arg4``, and ``arg5`` must be 0.

   The ABI properties described above are thread-scoped, inherited on
   clone() and fork() and cleared on exec().

   Calling ``prctl(PR_SET_TAGGED_ADDR_CTRL, PR_TAGGED_ADDR_ENABLE, 0, 0, 0)``
   returns ``-EINVAL`` if the AArch64 Tagged Address ABI is globally
   disabled by ``sysctl abi.tagged_addr_disabled=1``. The default
   ``sysctl abi.tagged_addr_disabled`` configuration is 0.

When the AArch64 Tagged Address ABI is enabled for a thread, the
following behaviours are guaranteed:

- All syscalls except the cases mentioned in section 3 can accept any
  valid tagged pointer.

- The syscall behaviour is undefined for invalid tagged pointers: it may
  result in an error code being returned, a (fatal) signal being raised,
  or other modes of failure.

- The syscall behaviour for a valid tagged pointer is the same as for
  the corresponding untagged pointer.


A definition of the meaning of tagged pointers on AArch64 can be found
in Documentation/arm64/tagged-pointers.rst.

3. AArch64 Tagged Address ABI Exceptions
-----------------------------------------

The following system call parameters must be untagged regardless of the
ABI relaxation:

- ``prctl()`` other than pointers to user data either passed directly or
  indirectly as arguments to be accessed by the kernel.

- ``ioctl()`` other than pointers to user data either passed directly or
  indirectly as arguments to be accessed by the kernel.

- ``shmat()`` and ``shmdt()``.

Any attempt to use non-zero tagged pointers may result in an error code
being returned, a (fatal) signal being raised, or other modes of
failure.

4. Example of correct usage
---------------------------
.. code-block:: c

   #include <stdlib.h>
   #include <string.h>
   #include <unistd.h>
   #include <sys/mman.h>
   #include <sys/prctl.h>
   
   #define PR_SET_TAGGED_ADDR_CTRL	55
   #define PR_TAGGED_ADDR_ENABLE	(1UL << 0)
   
   #define TAG_SHIFT		56
   
   int main(void)
   {
   	int tbi_enabled = 0;
   	unsigned long tag = 0;
   	char *ptr;
   
   	/* check/enable the tagged address ABI */
   	if (!prctl(PR_SET_TAGGED_ADDR_CTRL, PR_TAGGED_ADDR_ENABLE, 0, 0, 0))
   		tbi_enabled = 1;
   
   	/* memory allocation */
   	ptr = mmap(NULL, sysconf(_SC_PAGE_SIZE), PROT_READ | PROT_WRITE,
   		   MAP_PRIVATE | MAP_ANONYMOUS, -1, 0);
   	if (ptr == MAP_FAILED)
   		return 1;
   
   	/* set a non-zero tag if the ABI is available */
   	if (tbi_enabled)
   		tag = rand() & 0xff;
   	ptr = (char *)((unsigned long)ptr | (tag << TAG_SHIFT));
   
   	/* memory access to a tagged address */
   	strcpy(ptr, "tagged pointer\n");
   
   	/* syscall with a tagged pointer */
   	write(1, ptr, strlen(ptr));
   
   	return 0;
   }
